The Hadoop Distributed File System,
a storage system for big data.
As a storage layer, the Hadoop distributed
file system, or the way we call it HDFS.
Serves as the foundation for
most tools in the Hadoop ecosystem.
It provides two capabilities that
are essential for managing big data.
Scalability to large data sets.
And reliability to cope
with hardware failures.
HDFS allows you to store and
access large datasets.
According to Hortonworks,
a leading vendor of Hadoop services,
HDFS has shown production
scalability up to 200 petabytes and
a single cluster of 4,500 servers.
With close to a billion files and blocks.
If you run out of space, you can simply
add more nodes to increase the space.
HDFS achieves scalability
by partitioning or
splitting large files
across multiple computers.
This allows parallel access to very large
files since the computations run in
parallel on each node
where the data is stored.
Typical file size is
gigabytes to terabytes.
The default chunk size, the size of
each piece of a file is 64 megabytes.
But you can configure this to any size.
By spreading the file across many nodes,
the chances are increased that a node
storing one of the blocks will fail.
What happens next?
Do we lose the information
stored in block C?
HDFS is designed for
full tolerance in such case.
HDFS replicates, or
makes a copy of, file blocks on
different nodes to prevent data loss.
In this example,
the node that crashed stored block C.
But block C was replicated on
two other nodes in the cluster.
By default, HDFS maintains
three copies of every block.
This is the default replication factor.
But you can change it globally for
every file, or
on a per file basis.
HDFS is also designed to handle
a variety of data types aligned with
big data variety.
To read a file in HDFS you must
specify the input file format.
Similarly to write the file you must
provide the output file format.
HDFS provides a set of formats for
common data types.
But this is extensible and you can provide
custom formats for your data types.
For example text files can be read.
Line by line or a word at a time.
Geospatial data can be read as vectors or
rasters.
Data formats specific to geospatial data,
or
other domain specific data formats.
Like FASTA, or FASTQ formats for
sequence data genomics.
HDFS is comprised of two components.
NameNode, and DataNode.
These operate using a master
slave relationship.
Where the NameNode issues comments
to DataNodes across the cluster.
The NameNode is responsible for metadata.
And DataNodes provide block storage.
There is usually one NameNode per cluster,
a DataNode however,
runs on each node in the cluster.
In some sense the NameNode
is the administrator or
the coordinator of the HDFS cluster.
When the file is created,
the NameNode records the name,
location in the directory hierarchy and
other metadata.
The NameNode also decides which data nodes
to store the contents of the file and
remembers this mapping.
The DataNode runs on
each node in the cluster.
And is responsible for
storing the file blocks.
The data node listens to commands from
the name node for block creation,
deletion, and replication.
Replication provides two key capabilities.
Fault tolerance and data locality.
As discussed earlier, when a machine in
the cluster has a hardware failure there
are two other copies of each block
that are stored on that node.
So no data is lost.
Replication also means that the same block
will be stored on different nodes on
the system which are in different
geographical locations.
A location may mean a specific rack or
a data center in a different town.
The location is important since we
want to move computation to data and
not the other way around.
We'll talk about what moving computation
to data means later in this module.
As I mentioned earlier, the default
replication factor is three, but
you can change this.
A high replication factor means more
protection against hardware failures,
and better chances for data locality.
But it also means increased
storage space is used.
As a summary HDFS provides
scalable big data storage by
partitioning files over multiple nodes.
This helps to scale big data
analytics to large data volumes.
The application protects
against hardware failures and
provides data locality when we move
analytical complications to data.